Appendix E: Installation and Setup Guide
The following step-by-step guide describes how to install and run the application on a fresh Windows 11 machine.

E.1 Prerequisites
•	Python 3.10 or later installed — download from https://www.python.org/downloads/
•	MySQL 8.0 Community Server installed — download from https://dev.mysql.com/downloads/mysql/
•	Git installed — download from https://git-scm.com/download/win
•	A terminal application (Windows Command Prompt, PowerShell, or Windows Terminal)

E.2 Installation Steps
Step 1 — Clone the Repository
git clone https://github.com/Saeesh4/inventory-management-system.git
cd inventory-management-system

Step 2 — Install Python Dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

Step 3 — Set Up the MySQL Database
mysql -u root -p
source schema.sql
exit

Step 4 — Create the .env File
Create a file named .env in the project root folder with the following content (replace values as appropriate):
DB_HOST=localhost
DB_USER=root
DB_PASSWORD=your_mysql_password
DB_NAME=inventory_db
SECRET_KEY=your_random_secret_key_here

Step 5 — Generate Historical Data (Optional)
py generate_data.py

Step 6 — Run the Application
py app.py

Step 7 — Open in Browser
Navigate to http://127.0.0.1:5000 in your browser. Log in with:
Username: admin
Password: admin123

Appendix F: GitHub Repository Details

Item	Details
Repository URL	https://github.com/Saeesh4/inventory-management-system
Repository Name	inventory-management-system
Visibility	Public
Primary Language	Python (Flask)
Branch	main
Key Files	app.py, schema.sql, requirements.txt, .gitignore, generate_data.py, performance_test.py
README	Includes project overview, installation guide, and feature list
Table A.1: GitHub Repository Summary

Appendix G: List of Abbreviations

Abbreviation	Full Form
AI	Artificial Intelligence
API	Application Programming Interface
ARIMA	AutoRegressive Integrated Moving Average
BCA	Bachelor of Computer Applications
CSV	Comma-Separated Values
DB	Database
DFD	Data Flow Diagram
ERP	Enterprise Resource Planning
FK	Foreign Key
HTML	HyperText Markup Language
HTTP	HyperText Transfer Protocol
IDE	Integrated Development Environment
IoT	Internet of Things
KPI	Key Performance Indicator
LSTM	Long Short-Term Memory (neural network)
MCA	Master of Computer Applications
ML	Machine Learning
MS	MSc (DS): Master of Science in Data Science
MySQL	My Structured Query Language
OOP	Object-Oriented Programming
PDF	Portable Document Format
PK	Primary Key
RBAC	Role-Based Access Control
REST	Representational State Transfer
SDLC	Software Development Life Cycle
SQL	Structured Query Language
UAT	User Acceptance Testing
UI/UX	User Interface / User Experience
UML	Unified Modelling Language
URL	Uniform Resource Locator
WSGI	Web Server Gateway Interface
Table A.2: List of Abbreviations
 
Appendix H: User Manual
Full-Stack Inventory Management System with AI-Powered Stock Prediction
H.1 Introduction
This User Manual provides step-by-step instructions for using the Full-Stack Inventory Management System with AI-Powered Stock Prediction. The system is a web-based application accessible via a browser at http://localhost:5000. It supports two user roles — Admin and Staff — each with a defined set of permissions.

Module	Admin Access	Staff Access
Dashboard	Full access — view all stats, low stock alerts	Full access — view all stats, low stock alerts
Products	Add, Edit, Delete, View	Add, Edit, Delete, View
Suppliers	Add, Edit, Delete, View	Add, Edit, Delete, View
Transactions	Record Stock IN/OUT, View all	Record Stock IN/OUT, View all
AI Predictions	View predictions for all products	View predictions for all products
Reports	View charts, export CSV/PDF	View charts, export CSV/PDF
Manage Staff	Add staff, suspend/reactivate accounts	Not accessible
Change Password	Change own password	Change own password

Table H.1: Module Access Rights by User Role
H.2 Getting Started — Accessing the System
Prerequisites: The application must be running locally. If you are a student/developer running the system for the first time, refer to Appendix E (Installation and Setup Guide) before proceeding.

1.	Open a web browser (Google Chrome recommended).
2.	Navigate to: http://localhost:5000
3.	You will be redirected to the Login page.
4.	Enter your registered Email Address and Password.
5.	Click the Login button. You will be directed to the Dashboard.

ℹ️ If you see a 'This site can't be reached' error, ensure that the Flask application (app.py) is running in your terminal or command prompt.
H.3 Dashboard
The Dashboard is the home screen displayed immediately after login. It provides a real-time overview of the inventory system.

The Dashboard contains the following sections:
•	Summary Cards: Four cards displaying Total Products, Total Suppliers, Total Transactions, and Low Stock Items count.
•	Low Stock Alert Table: A table listing all products where current stock quantity is at or below the defined reorder level. Each row shows Product Name, Category, Current Quantity, and Reorder Level.

⚠️ If the Low Stock Alert Table shows products, take immediate action by recording a Stock IN transaction or placing a supplier order.
H.4 Products Module
The Products module allows management of the product catalogue. Admin users can add, edit, and delete products. Staff users can only view the product list.

H.4.1 Adding a New Product
6.	Click 'Products' in the left sidebar.
7.	Fill in the Add New Product form on the left side of the page: Product Name, Category, Quantity, Price, and Reorder Level.
8.	Click the Add Product button. The product will appear in the product table.

H.4.2 Editing a Product 
9.	In the product table, click the Edit (pencil) icon next to the product.
10.	Update the required fields in the edit form.
11.	Click Save Changes.

H.4.3 Deleting a Product  
12.	Click the Delete (trash) icon next to the product.
13.	Confirm the deletion in the confirmation prompt.

ℹ️ Deleting a product will also remove its associated transaction history. This action cannot be undone.
H.5 Suppliers Module
The Suppliers module maintains a directory of all suppliers. Admin users can add, edit, and delete suppliers; Staff users can view the list.

H.5.1 Adding a Supplier 
14.	Click 'Suppliers' in the left sidebar.
15.	Fill in Supplier Name, Contact Person, Email, Phone, and Address in the Add Supplier form.
16.	Click Add Supplier.

H.5.2 Editing or Deleting a Supplier  
17.	Use the Edit or Delete icons in the supplier table, the same way as in the Products module.
H.6 Transactions Module
The Transactions module is the core operational module. Both Admin and Staff can record Stock IN (goods received) and Stock OUT (goods dispatched/consumed) transactions.

H.6.1 Recording a Stock Transaction
18.	Click 'Transactions' in the left sidebar.
19.	Select the Product from the dropdown menu.
20.	Select the Transaction Type: Stock IN or Stock OUT.
21.	Enter the Quantity.
22.	Click Add Transaction. The product's stock quantity will be updated automatically.

⚠️ For Stock OUT transactions: if the requested quantity exceeds the current stock, the system will display an 'Insufficient stock' error and the transaction will not be saved.
H.7 AI Predictions Module
The AI Predictions module uses a Linear Regression model (scikit-learn) trained on historical stock-OUT transactions to forecast each product's daily consumption rate and estimated days until stockout.

H.7.1 Reading a Prediction Card
•	Product Name & Badge: Displays the product and its current status — 🚨 Reorder Now (< reorder level), ✅ Stock OK, ⚠️ Overstock.
•	Current Stock: The live-stock quantity pulled from the database.
•	AI Daily Usage: The predicted daily consumption rate calculated by the Linear Regression model.
•	Days Left: Estimated number of days before stockout, based on current stock divided by daily usage.
•	Suggested Order: Recommended quantity to order, calculated as the reorder level minus current stock.
•	AI Accuracy (R²): The R-squared score measuring model fit. Values above 70% indicate reliable predictions.
•	Reorder Urgency Badge: Colour-coded urgency — red for immediate, orange for soon, green for no action.

ℹ️ Products with fewer than 2 stock-OUT transactions will display 'N/A' for prediction values. Record more transactions to enable AI predictions for those products.
H.8 Reports Module
The Reports module provides visual analytics and data export options.

•	Bar Charts: Visual representation of Stock IN and Stock OUT quantities per product.
•	Low Stock Table: A summary table of all products below their reorder level.
•	CSV Export: Click the 'Export CSV' button to download the full transaction ledger as a .csv file, compatible with Microsoft Excel and Google Sheets.
•	PDF Export: Click the 'Export PDF' button to download a formatted PDF transaction ledger generated by ReportLab.
H.9 Manage Staff Module (Admin Only)
This module is accessible only to Admin users. It allows the administrator to manage staff accounts.

H.9.1 Adding a New Staff User
23.	Click 'Manage Staff' in the sidebar (visible to Admin only).
24.	Fill in the staff member's Full Name, Email, and Password in the Add Staff form.
25.	Click Add Staff Member. The new account will appear in the staff table with the 'staff' role.

H.9.2 Suspending or Reactivating a Staff Account
26.	In the staff table, use the Suspend or Reactivate button next to the relevant account.
27.	Suspended accounts cannot log in. Reactivated accounts regain full staff access immediately.

⚠️ An admin account cannot be suspended through this module. Only staff-role accounts can be suspended.
H.10 Change Password
All users (Admin and Staff) can change their own password at any time.

28.	Click 'Change Password' in the left sidebar.
29.	Enter your Current Password.
30.	Enter a New Password and confirm it in the Confirm New Password field.
31.	Click Change Password. You will be logged out and redirected to the Login page.

ℹ️ Passwords are stored using the scrypt hashing algorithm. Neither the Admin nor the system can retrieve your plaintext password. If you forget your password, contact the system administrator.
H.11 Logging Out
Click the 'Logout' link at the bottom of the left sidebar. Your session will be terminated and you will be redirected to the Login page. Always log out when leaving the system, especially on shared computers.
H.12 Common Issues and Troubleshooting

Issue	Likely Cause	Solution
Cannot access http://localhost:5000	Flask app not running	Run: python app.py in the project directory
'Insufficient stock' error on Stock OUT	Requested qty > available stock	Check current stock on Dashboard or Products page
N/A shown in AI Predictions	Not enough transaction history	Record at least 2 Stock OUT transactions for the product
Login fails with correct password	Account may be suspended	Contact Admin to reactivate your account
CSV/PDF download does not start	Browser blocking downloads	Allow downloads from localhost in browser settings
Page loads very slowly	MySQL server not running	Start MySQL service and ensure.env credentials are correct

Table H.2: Common Issues and Solutions
